1))) Where do we find logs for nginx?

ans: 

- name: Get last 10 lines of Nginx error log
  ansible.builtin.command: tail -n 10 /var/log/nginx/error.log
  register: nginx_error_log_tail

- name: Display last 10 lines of Nginx error log
  ansible.builtin.debug:
    var: nginx_error_log_tail.stdout_lines



2)) What is the use of dnf updateinfo list security

ans: “The command dnf updateinfo list security is used to list all security advisories related to installed packages on a Linux system. 
    It’s mainly used for vulnerability management, ensuring only security patches are applied, 
    which is critical in production environments for maintaining system security and compliance.”


3))) Question: What is the difference between an inventory file and a configuration file in Ansible?

Answer:
“In Ansible, the inventory file defines where automation should run, meaning it contains the list of hosts, 
their groups, IP addresses, and variables. For example, if I have a group of web servers and a group of database servers, 
I’ll declare them in the inventory so Ansible knows which machines to target.

On the other hand, the configuration file (ansible.cfg) controls how Ansible runs. 
It sets defaults like the location of the inventory file, the default remote user, privilege escalation methods, logging, and timeouts. 
Essentially, it’s like a control panel that defines Ansible’s behavior.

So in simple terms: the inventory file tells Ansible which servers to manage, and the configuration file tells 
Ansible how to connect and execute tasks on them. Both work together — for example, 
I might define my servers in inventory.ini and configure Ansible to use a specific SSH user and sudo settings in ansible.cfg.”


4))) is it mandatory to mention inventroy file path in command if i already use its path on configuration file?
ans: No, it’s not mandatory to mention the inventory file path in the command if you have already specified it in your ansible.cfg
      📌 When you do need to specify inventory path (-i)

      If you want to override the default inventory. Example:
      ansible-playbook -i staging.ini site.yml
      ansible-playbook -i production.ini site.yml

      If you didn’t set the inventory path in ansible.cfg.“If I place an ansible.cfg file in my current working directory, 
      Ansible will prioritize it over the user or system-level config. This is very useful for project-specific setups, 
      because I can keep different configurations isolated per project without overriding the global /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg.”

      “Yes, we can define a custom inventory file in ansible.cfg under the [defaults] section. This way, 
       Ansible automatically picks the inventory without requiring us to pass -i each time. For example, 
       in one project I may set the default inventory to a staging file, but if I want to run against production, 
       I can still override it with the -i option. This makes the workflow flexible and avoids mistakes.”

      



